---
layout: post
title: "CI/CD: What the Heck is it?"
description: "A beginner's guide to understanding CI/CD, its importance in software development, and how it can streamline your workflow."
categories: [DevOps, Software-Engineering]
tags: [Best-Practices, Software-Development]
redirect_from:
  - /2025/06/04/
---

* Table of Contents
{:toc .toc}

# CI/CD: What the Heck is it?

There are two foundational principals in software development. Software development is primarily and fundamentally always an exercise in **learning** and **discovery**. To achieve that and to allows us to scale that product process up, we need to focus on managing complexity of the things we build. We don't get great at learning and discovery by doing the same thing over and over again. We get great at it by learning from our mistakes, iterating on our ideas, and improving our processes. And that's where CI/CD comes in. You can call it a good practice, a methodology, a philosophy or even a trick. But at its core, CI/CD is about making software development more efficient and effective.

## CI - Continuous Integration

Continuous Integration (CI) is the practice of frequently integrating code changes into a shared repository. The goal is to detect errors quickly and improve software quality. This may sound something which you already do but some time back, it was common for individuals or teams to keep their code changes in isolation for long periods, leading to integration challenges and bugs. CI addresses this by encouraging developers to commit code changes regularly, ideally multiple times a day. Each commit triggers an automated build and test process, ensuring that new code integrates smoothly with the existing codebase.

Every time a developer pushes code to the repository, an automated system runs tests to verify that the new code doesn't break existing functionality. This helps catch bugs early, making it easier to fix them before they become larger issues. There are primarily three kinds of tests that are run in CI:

1. **Unit Tests**: These tests check individual components or functions of the code to ensure they work as expected.
2. **Integration Tests**: These tests verify that different components of the application work together correctly.
3. **End-to-End Tests**: These tests simulate real user scenarios to ensure the entire application functions as intended.

## CD - Continuous Delivery/Deployment

Continuous Delivery is the practice of ensuring that code changes are automatically prepared for a release to production. It builds on CI by automating the deployment process, allowing teams to release software more frequently and reliably.

CI/CD together is the practice of merging changes frequently as developers work on a project, and having those changes automatically pass through a series of automated tests. Upon completion, these changes are bundled into a release that can be deployed to production at any time. Teams practicing *CI/CD* will typically produce multiple releases per day, allowing them to respond quickly to user feedback and market changes. To put it simply, without CI/CD, our code would have names ending with `_final_finalfinal_no_really_final_v3` or something like that.

## References

* [Continous Delvery Simply Explained](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qiDIif7JVMo&ab_channel=ModernSoftwareEngineering)

* [Continuous integration vs. delivery vs. deployment](https://www.atlassian.com/continuous-delivery/principles/continuous-integration-vs-delivery-vs-deployment)

* [CI/CD in 5 minutes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=42UP1fxi2SY&ab_channel=ByteByteGo)

* [CI/CD Explained](https://continuousdelivery.com/foundations/continuous-integration/)
